---
title: AI weekly (06/2020)
subtitle: My selection of news on AI/ML and Data Science
date: 2020-02-08
# lastmod: 2020-01-21
bigimg: [{src: "/img/2020-02-08-ai-weekly-06-2020.jpg", desc: "Leipzig (2018)"}]
tags: ["ai-news"]
---

+++ Google’s ML-fairness-gym: A Tool for Exploring Long-Term Impacts of Machine Learning Systems +++ White House reportedly aims to double AI research budget to $2B +++ Facebook has acquired Scape Technologies, a London-based computer vision startup +++ Avigilon's Appearance Search Can Tell Schools Where Students Are And Where They’ve Been +++ RGISTools: Downloading, Customizing, and Processing Time-Series of Remote Sensing Data in R +++
 
<!--more-->


## Breakthrough &mdash; Or So They Say

 
 


## Tools and Frameworks

**Google’s ML-fairness-gym: A Tool for Exploring Long-Term Impacts of Machine Learning Systems.**  As machine learning becomes increasingly incorporated within high impact decision ecosystems, there is a growing need to understand the long-term behaviors of deployed ML-based decision systems and their potential consequences. Most approaches to understanding or improving the fairness of these systems have focused on static settings without considering long-term dynamics. To address this structural difficulty in the field, [Google advocates](https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/02/ml-fairness-gym-tool-for-exploring-long.html) for the use of simulation as a key tool in studying the fairness of algorithms. Their new framework [ML-fairness-gym](https://github.com/google/ml-fairness-gym/blob/master/papers/acm_fat_2020_fairness_is_not_static.pdf) has now been released on [github](https://github.com/google/ml-fairness-gym/). The ML-fairness-gym simulates sequential decision making using [Open AI’s Gym](https://gym.openai.com/) framework. In this framework, agents interact with simulated environments in a loop. At each step, an agent chooses an action that then affects the environment’s state. The environment then reveals an observation that the agent uses to inform its subsequent actions. In this framework, environments model the system and dynamics of the problem and observations serve as data to the agent, which can be encoded as a machine learning system.


## Business News and Applications

**White House reportedly aims to double AI research budget to $2B.** 
[According to Reuters](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-budget-research/trump-administration-to-propose-big-jump-in-funding-for-ai-quantum-rd-sources-idUSKBN2012OK), The White House will propose a big jump in U.S. government spending on artificial intelligence (AI) and quantum information sciences research and development in its 2021 budget proposal, two people briefed on the plan said. The Trump administration wants Congress to double spending on AI R&D funding from $973 million to nearly $2 billion by 2022 and to double spending on quantum information sciences spending to $860 million within two years. The figures do not include some Defense Department research programs. Officials say the jump is aimed at keeping pace with China’s efforts.


**Facebook has acquired Scape Technologies, a London-based computer vision startup.** Scape Technologies, a London-based computer vision startup working on location accuracy beyond the capabilities of GPS, has been acquired by Facebook, according to an [article on TechCrunch](https://techcrunch.com/2020/02/08/scapebook/). Founded in 2017, Scape Technologies was developing a “Visual Positioning Service” based on computer vision which lets developers build apps that require location accuracy far beyond the capabilities of GPS alone. The technology initially targeted augmented reality apps, but also had the potential to be used to power applications in mobility, logistics and robotics. More broadly, Scape wanted to enable any machine equipped with a camera to understand its surroundings. The acquisition will support Facebook's investment in next generation platforms, including VR and AR.


**Avigilon's Appearance Search Can Tell Schools Where Students Are And Where They’ve Been.** As mass shootings at US schools increase in frequency, more school administrators across the US are turning to artificially intelligent surveillance tools in an attempt to beef up school safety. [Recode](https://www.vox.com/recode/2020/1/25/21080749/surveillance-school-artificial-intelligence-facial-recognition) takes a closer look at one such solution, the AI-based software [Appearance Search by Avigilon](https://www.avigilon.com/products/ai-video-analytics/appearance-search). Appearance Search allows school administrators to review where a person has traveled throughout campus — anywhere there’s a camera — using data the system collects about that person’s clothing, shape, size, and potentially their facial characteristics, among other factors. It also allows security officials to search through camera feeds using certain physical descriptions, like a person’s age, gender, and hair color. So while the tool can’t say who the person is, it can find where else they’ve likely been. For some, this raises big concerns ...



## Publications
 





## Tutorials

**RGISTools: Downloading, Customizing, and Processing Time-Series of Remote Sensing Data in R** [(arXiv:2002.01859)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.01859). There is a large number of data archives and web services offering free access to multispectral satellite imagery. Archives and web services differ in their protocols, formats, and data standards, which are barriers to combine datasets. This article presents RGISTools, an R package to create time-series of multispectral satellite images from multiple platforms in a harmonized and standardized way. The package functionalities are described and then applied in an extended case study.



